<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII: Night Work</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Night Work</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>From the little colony of new houses at the foot of the Shawl to the police station at the end of the High Street was only a few minutes’ walk. Mallalieu was a quick walker, and he covered this distance at his top speed. But during those few minutes he came to a conclusion, for he was as quick of thought as in the use of his feet.</p>
			<p>Of course, Cotherstone had killed Kitely. That was certain. He had begun to suspect that as soon as he heard of the murder; he became convinced of it as soon as young Bent mentioned that Cotherstone had left his guests for an hour after supper. Without a doubt Cotherstone had lost his head and done this foolish thing! And now Cotherstone must be protected, safeguarded; heaven and earth must be moved lest suspicion should fall on him. For nothing could be done to Cotherstone without effect upon himself⁠—and of himself⁠—and of himself Mallalieu meant to take very good care. Never mind what innocent person suffered, Cotherstone must go free.</p>
			<p>And the first thing to do was to assume direction of the police, to pull strings, to engineer matters. No matter how much he believed in Harborough’s innocence, Harborough was the man to go for⁠—at present. Attention must be concentrated on him, and on him only. Anything⁠—anything, at whatever cost of morals and honesty to divert suspicion from that fool of a Cotherstone!⁠—if it were not already too late. It was the desire to make sure that it was not too late, the desire to be beforehand, that made Mallalieu hasten to the police. He knew his own power, he had a supreme confidence in his ability to manage things, and he was determined to give up the night to the scheme already seething in his fertile brain rather than that justice should enter upon what he would consider a wrong course.</p>
			<p>While he sat silently and intently listening to Bent’s story of the crime, Mallalieu, who could think and listen and give full attention to both mental processes without letting either suffer at the expense of the other, had reconstructed the murder. He knew Cotherstone⁠—nobody knew him half as well. Cotherstone was what Mallalieu called deep⁠—he was ingenious, resourceful, inventive. Cotherstone, in the early hours of the evening, had doubtless thought the whole thing out. He would be well acquainted with his prospective victim’s habits. He would know exactly when and where to waylay Kitely. The filching of the piece of cord from the wall of Harborough’s shed was a clever thing⁠—infernally clever, thought Mallalieu, who had a designing man’s wholehearted admiration for any sort of cleverness in his own particular line. It would be an easy thing to do⁠—and what a splendidly important thing! Of course Cotherstone knew all about Harborough’s arrangements⁠—he would often pass the pig-killer’s house⁠—from the hedge of the garden he would have seen the coils of greased rope hanging from their nails under the verandah roof, aye, a thousand times. Nothing easier than to slip into Harborough’s garden from the adjacent wood, cut off a length of the cord, use it⁠—and leave it as a first bit of evidence against a man whose public record was uncertain. Oh, very clever indeed!⁠—if only Cotherstone could carry things off, and not allow his conscience to write marks on his face. And he must help⁠—and innocent as he felt Harborough to be, he must set things going against Harborough⁠—his life was as naught, against the Mallalieu-Cotherstone safety.</p>
			<p>Mallalieu walked into the police-station, to find the sergeant just returned and in consultation with the superintendent, whom he had summoned to hear his report. Both turned inquiringly on the Mayor.</p>
			<p>“I’ve heard all about it,” said Mallalieu, bustling forward. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bent told me. Now then, where’s that cord they talk about?”</p>
			<p>The sergeant pointed to the coil and the severed piece, which lay on a large sheet of brown paper on a side-table, preparatory to being sealed up. Mallalieu crossed over and made a short examination of these exhibits; then he turned to the superintendent with an air of decision.</p>
			<p>“Aught been done?” he demanded.</p>
			<p>“Not yet, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mayor,” answered the superintendent. “We were just consulting as to what’s best to be done.”</p>
			<p>“I should think that’s obvious,” replied Mallalieu. “You must get to work! Two things you want to do just now. Ring up Norcaster for one thing, and High Gill Junction for another. Give ’em a description of Harborough⁠—he’ll probably have made for one place or another, to get away by train. And ask ’em at Norcaster to lend you a few plainclothes men, and to send ’em along here at once by motor⁠—there’s no train till morning. Then, get all your own men out⁠—now!⁠—and keep folk off the paths in that wood, and put a watch on Harborough’s house, in case he should put a bold face on it and come back⁠—he’s impudence enough⁠—and of course, if he comes, they’ll take him. Get to all that now⁠—at once!”</p>
			<p>“You think it’s Harborough, then?” said the superintendent.</p>
			<p>“I think there’s what the law folks call a prymer facy case against him,” replied Mallalieu. “It’s your duty to get him, anyway, and if he can clear himself, why, let him. Get busy with that telephone, and be particular about help from Norcaster⁠—we’re understaffed here as it is.”</p>
			<p>The superintendent hurried out of his office and Mallalieu turned to the sergeant.</p>
			<p>“I understood from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bent,” he said, “that that housekeeper of Kitely’s said the old fellow had been to the bank at noon today, to draw some money? That so?”</p>
			<p>“So she said, your Worship,” answered the sergeant. “Some allowance, or something of that sort, that he drew once a quarter. She didn’t know how much.”</p>
			<p>“But she thought he’d have it on him when he was attacked?” asked Mallalieu.</p>
			<p>“She said he was a man for carrying his money on him always,” replied the sergeant. “We understood from her it was his habit. She says he always had a good bit on him⁠—as a rule. And of course, if he’d drawn more today, why, he might have a fair lot.”</p>
			<p>“We’ll soon find that out,” remarked Mallalieu. “I’ll step round to the bank manager and rouse him. Now you get your men together⁠—this is no time for sleeping. You ought to have men up at the Shawl now.”</p>
			<p>“I’ve left one man at Kitely’s cottage, sir, and another about Harborough’s⁠—in case Harborough should come back during the night,” said the sergeant. “We’ve two more constables close by the station. I’ll get them up.”</p>
			<p>“Do it just now,” commanded Mallalieu. “I’ll be back in a while.”</p>
			<p>He hurried out again and went rapidly down the High Street to the old-fashioned building near the Town Hall in which the one bank of the little town did its business, and in which the bank manager lived. There was not a soul about in the street, and the ringing of the bell at the bank-house door, and the loud knock which Mallalieu gave in supplement to it, seemed to wake innumerable echoes. And proof as he believed himself to be against such slight things, the sudden opening of a window above his head made him jump.</p>
			<p>The startled bank-manager, hurrying down to his midnight visitor in his dressing-gown and slippers, stood aghast when he had taken the Mayor within and learned his errand.</p>
			<p>“Certainly!” he said. “Kitely was in the bank today, about noon⁠—I attended to him myself. That’s the second time he’s been here since he came to the town. He called here a day or two after he first took that house from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cotherstone⁠—to cash a draft for his quarter’s pension. He told me then who he was. Do you know?”</p>
			<p>“Not in the least,” replied Mallalieu, telling the lie all the more readily because he had been fully prepared for the question to which it was an answer. “I knew naught about him.”</p>
			<p>“He was an ex-detective,” said the bank-manager. “Pensioned off, of course: a nice pension. He told me he’d had⁠—I believe it was getting on to forty years’ service in the police force. Dear, dear, this is a sad business⁠—and I’m afraid I can tell you a bit more about it.”</p>
			<p>“What?” demanded Mallalieu, showing surprise in spite of himself.</p>
			<p>“You mentioned Harborough,” said the bank-manager, shaking his head.</p>
			<p>“Well?” said Mallalieu. “What then?”</p>
			<p>“Harborough was at the counter when Kitely took his money,” answered the bank-manager. “He had called in to change a five-pound note.”</p>
			<p>The two men looked at each other in silence for a time. Then the bank-manager shook his head again.</p>
			<p>“You wouldn’t think that a man who has a five-pound note of his own to change would be likely, to murder another man for what he could get,” he went on. “But Kitely had a nice bit of money to carry away, and he wore a very valuable gold watch and chain, which he was rather fond of showing in the town, and⁠—eh?”</p>
			<p>“It’s a suspicious business,” said Mallalieu. “You say Harborough saw Kitely take his money?”</p>
			<p>“Couldn’t fail,” replied the bank-manager. “He was standing by him. The old man put it⁠—notes and gold⁠—in a pocket that he had inside his waistcoat.”</p>
			<p>Mallalieu lingered, as if in thought, rubbing his chin and staring at the carpet. “Well, that’s a sort of additional clue,” he remarked at last. “It looks very black against Harborough.”</p>
			<p>“We’ve the numbers of the notes that I handed to Kitely,” observed the bank-manager. “They may be useful if there’s any attempt to change any note, you know.”</p>
			<p>Mallalieu shook his head.</p>
			<p>“Aye, just so,” he answered. “But I should say there won’t be⁠—just yet. It’s a queer business, isn’t it⁠—but, as I say, there’s evidence against this fellow, and we must try to get him.”</p>
			<p>He went out then and crossed the street to the doctor’s house⁠—while he was about it, he wanted to know all he could. And with the doctor he stopped much longer than he had stopped at the bank, and when he left him he was puzzled. For the doctor said to him what he had said to Cotherstone and to Bent and to the rest of the group in the wood⁠—that whoever had strangled Kitely had had experience in that sort of grim work before⁠—or else he was a sailorman who had expert knowledge of tying knots. Now Mallalieu was by that time more certain than ever that Cotherstone was the murderer, and he felt sure that Cotherstone had no experience of that sort of thing.</p>
			<p>“Done with a single twist and a turn!” he muttered to himself as he walked back to the police-station. “Aye⁠—aye!⁠—that seems to show knowledge. But it’s not my business to follow that up just now⁠—I know what my business is⁠—nobody better.”</p>
			<p>The superintendent and the sergeant were giving orders to two sleepy-eyed policemen when Mallalieu rejoined them. He waited until the policemen had gone away to patrol the Shawl and then took the superintendent aside.</p>
			<p>“I’ve heard a bit more incriminatory news against Harborough,” he said. “He was in the bank this morning⁠—or yesterday morning, as it now is⁠—when Kitely drew his money. There may be naught in that⁠—and there may be a lot. Anyway, he knew the old man had a goodish bit on him.”</p>
			<p>The superintendent nodded, but his manner was doubtful.</p>
			<p>“Well, of course, that’s evidence⁠—considering things,” he said, “but you know as well as I do, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mayor, that Harborough’s not a man that’s ever been in want of money. It’s the belief of a good many folks in the town that he has money of his own: he’s always been a bit of a mystery ever since I can remember. He could afford to give that daughter of his a good education⁠—good as a young lady gets⁠—and he spends plenty, and I never heard of him owing aught. Of course, he’s a queer lot⁠—we know he’s a poacher and all that, but he’s so skilful about it that we’ve never been able to catch him. I can’t think he’s the guilty party⁠—and yet⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You can’t get away from the facts,” said Mallalieu. “He’ll have to be sought for. If he’s made himself scarce⁠—if he doesn’t come home⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Ah, that ’ud certainly be against him!” agreed the superintendent. “Well, I’m doing all I can. We’ve got our own men out, and there’s three officers coming over from Norcaster by motor⁠—they’re on the way now.”</p>
			<p>“Send for me if aught turns up,” said Mallalieu.</p>
			<p>He walked slowly home, his brain still busy with possibilities and eventualities. And within five minutes of his waking at his usual hour of six it was again busy⁠—and curious. For he and Cotherstone, both keen business men who believed in constant supervision of their workmen, were accustomed to meet at the yard at half-past six every morning, summer or winter, and he was wondering what his partner would say and do⁠—and look like.</p>
			<p>Cotherstone was in the yard when Mallalieu reached it. He was giving some orders to a carter, and he finished what he was doing before coming up to Mallalieu. In the half light of the morning he looked pretty much as usual⁠—but Mallalieu noticed a certain worn look under his eyes and suppressed nervousness in his voice. He himself remained silent and observant, and he let Cotherstone speak first.</p>
			<p>“Well?” said Cotherstone, coming close to him as they stood in a vacant space outside the office. “Well?”</p>
			<p>“Well?” responded Mallalieu.</p>
			<p>Cotherstone began to fidget with some account books and papers that he had brought from his house. He eyed his partner with furtive glances; Mallalieu eyed him with steady and watchful ones.</p>
			<p>“I suppose you’ve heard all about it?” said Cotherstone, after an awkward silence.</p>
			<p>“Aye!” replied Mallalieu, drily. “Aye, I’ve heard.”</p>
			<p>Cotherstone looked round. There was no one near him, but he dropped his voice to a whisper.</p>
			<p>“So long as nobody but him knew,” he muttered, giving Mallalieu another side glance, “so long as he hadn’t said aught to anybody⁠—and I don’t think he had⁠—we’re⁠—safe.”</p>
			<p>Mallalieu was still staring quietly at Cotherstone. And Cotherstone began to grow restless under that steady, questioning look.</p>
			<p>“Oh?” observed Mallalieu, at last. “Aye? You think so? Ah!”</p>
			<p>“Good God⁠—don’t you!” exclaimed Cotherstone, roused to a sudden anger. “Why⁠—”</p>
			<p>But just then a policeman came out of the High Street into the yard, caught sight of the two partners, and came over to them, touching his helmet.</p>
			<p>“Can your Worship step across the way?” he asked. “They’ve brought Harborough down, and the Super wants a word with you.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
