<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I: Blackmail</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Blackmail</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Halfway along the north side of the main street of Highmarket an ancient stone gateway, imposing enough to suggest that it was originally the entrance to some castellated mansion or manor house, gave access to a square yard, flanked about by equally ancient buildings. What those buildings had been used for in other days was not obvious to the casual and careless observer, but to the least observant their present use was obvious enough. Here were piles of timber from Norway; there were stacks of slate from Wales; here was marble from Aberdeen, and there cement from Portland: the old chambers of the grey buildings were filled to overflowing with all the things that go towards making a house‚ÅÝ‚Äîironwork, zinc, lead, tiles, great coils of piping, stores of domestic appliances. And on a shining brass plate, set into the wall, just within the gateway, were deeply engraven the words: <b>Mallalieu and Cotherstone, Builders and Contractors</b>.</p>
			<p>Whoever had walked into Mallalieu¬Ý&amp; Cotherstone‚Äôs yard one October afternoon a few years ago would have seen Mallalieu and Cotherstone in person. The two partners had come out of their office and gone down the yard to inspect half a dozen new carts, just finished, and now drawn up in all the glory of fresh paint. Mallalieu had designed those carts himself, and he was now pointing out their advantages to Cotherstone, who was more concerned with the bookkeeping and letter-writing side of the business than with its actual work. He was a big, fleshy man, Mallalieu, midway between fifty and sixty, of a large, solemn, well-satisfied countenance, small, sly eyes, and an expression of steady watchfulness; his attire was always of the eminently respectable sort, his linen fresh and glossy; the thick gold chain across his ample front, and the silk hat which he invariably wore, gave him an unmistakable air of prosperity. He stood now, the silk hat cocked a little to one side, one hand under the tail of his broadcloth coat, a pudgy finger of the other pointing to some new feature of the mechanism of the new carts, and he looked the personification of self-satisfaction and smug content.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAll done in one action, d‚Äôye see, Cotherstone?‚Äù he was saying. ‚ÄúOne pull at that pin releases the entire load. We‚Äôd really ought to have a patent for that idea.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cotherstone went nearer the cart which they were examining. He was a good deal of a contrast to his partner‚ÅÝ‚Äîa slightly built, wiry man, nervous and quick of movement; although he was Mallalieu‚Äôs junior he looked older, and the thin hair at his temples was already whitening. Mallalieu suggested solidity and almost bovine sleekness; in Cotherstone, activity of speech and gesture was marked well-nigh to an appearance of habitual anxiety. He stepped about the cart with the quick action of an inquisitive bird or animal examining something which it has never seen before.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, yes, yes!‚Äù he answered. ‚ÄúYes, that‚Äôs a good idea. But if it‚Äôs to be patented, you know, we ought to see to it at once, before these carts go into use.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, there‚Äôs nobody in Highmarket like to rob us,‚Äù observed Mallalieu, good-humouredly. ‚ÄúYou might consider about getting‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat do they call it?‚ÅÝ‚Äîprovisional protection?‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll look it up,‚Äù responded Cotherstone. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs worth that, anyhow.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo,‚Äù said Mallalieu. He pulled out the big gold watch which hung from the end of his cable chain and glanced at its jewelled dial. ‚ÄúDear me!‚Äù he exclaimed. ‚ÄúFour o‚Äôclock‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôve a meeting in the Mayor‚Äôs parlour at ten past. But I‚Äôll look in again before going home.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He hurried away towards the entrance gate, and Cotherstone, after ruminative inspection of the new carts, glanced at some papers in his hand and went over to a consignment of goods which required checking. He was carefully ticking them off on a list when a clerk came down the yard.</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝKitely called to pay his rent, sir,‚Äù he announced. ‚ÄúHe asked to see you yourself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTwenty-five‚ÅÝ‚Äîsix‚ÅÝ‚Äîseven,‚Äù counted Cotherstone. ‚ÄúTake him into the private office, Stoner,‚Äù he answered. ‚ÄúI‚Äôll be there in a minute.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He continued his checking until it was finished, entered the figures on his list, and went briskly back to the countinghouse near the gateway. There he bustled into a room kept sacred to himself and Mallalieu, with a cheery greeting to his visitor‚ÅÝ‚Äîan elderly man who had recently rented from him a small house on the outskirts of the town.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAfternoon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝKitely,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúGlad to see you, sir‚ÅÝ‚Äîalways glad to see anybody with a bit of money, eh? Take a chair, sir‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI hope you‚Äôre satisfied with the little place, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝKitely?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The visitor took the offered elbow-chair, folded his hands on the top of his old-fashioned walking-cane, and glanced at his landlord with a half-humorous, half-quizzical expression. He was an elderly, clean-shaven, grey-haired man, spare of figure, dressed in rusty black; a wisp of white neckcloth at his throat gave him something of a clerical appearance: Cotherstone, who knew next to nothing about him, except that he was able to pay his rent and taxes, had already set him down as a retired verger of some cathedral.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI should think you and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMallalieu are in no need of a bit of money, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCotherstone,‚Äù he said quietly. ‚ÄúBusiness seems to be good with you, sir.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, so-so,‚Äù replied Cotherstone, offhandedly. ‚ÄúNaught to complain of, of course. I‚Äôll give you a receipt, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝKitely,‚Äù he went on, seating himself at his desk and taking up a book of forms. ‚ÄúLet‚Äôs see‚ÅÝ‚Äîtwenty-five pounds a year is six pound five a quarter‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere you are, sir. Will you have a drop of whisky?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Kitely laid a handful of gold and silver on the desk, took the receipt, and nodded his head, still watching Cotherstone with the same half-humorous expression.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThank you,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI shouldn‚Äôt mind.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He watched Cotherstone produce a decanter and glasses, watched him fetch fresh water from a filter in the corner of the room, watched him mix the drinks, and took his own with no more than a polite nod of thanks. And Cotherstone, murmuring an expression of good wishes, took a drink himself, and sat down with his desk-chair turned towards his visitor.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAught you‚Äôd like doing at the house, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝKitely?‚Äù he asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù answered Kitely, ‚Äúno, I can‚Äôt say that there is.‚Äù</p>
			<p>There was something odd, almost taciturn, in his manner, and Cotherstone glanced at him a little wonderingly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd how do you like Highmarket, now you‚Äôve had a spell of it?‚Äù he inquired. ‚ÄúGot settled down, I suppose, now?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs all that I expected,‚Äù replied Kitely. ‚ÄúQuiet‚ÅÝ‚Äîpeaceful. How do you like it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMe!‚Äù exclaimed Cotherstone, surprised. ‚ÄúMe?‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhy, I‚Äôve had‚ÅÝ‚Äîyes, five-and-twenty years of it!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Kitely took another sip from his glass and set it down. He gave Cotherstone a sharp look.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúyes‚ÅÝ‚Äîfive-and-twenty years. You and your partner, both. Yes‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôll be just about thirty years since I first saw you. But‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôve forgotten.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cotherstone, who had been lounging forward, warming his hands at the fire, suddenly sat straight up in his chair. His face, always sharp seemed to grow sharper as he turned to his visitor with a questioning look.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSince‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat?‚Äù he demanded.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSince I first saw you‚ÅÝ‚Äîand <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMallalieu,‚Äù replied Kitely. ‚ÄúAs I say, you‚Äôve forgotten. But‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI haven‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cotherstone sat staring at his tenant for a full minute of speechlessness. Then he slowly rose, walked over to the door, looked at it to see that it was closed, and returning to the hearth, fixed his eyes on Kitely.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat do you mean?‚Äù he asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúJust what I say,‚Äù answered Kitely, with a dry laugh. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs thirty years since I first saw you and Mallalieu. That‚Äôs all.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhere?‚Äù demanded Cotherstone.</p>
			<p>Kitely motioned his landlord to sit down. And Cotherstone sat down‚ÅÝ‚Äîtrembling. His arm shook when Kitely laid a hand on it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you want to know where?‚Äù he asked, bending close to Cotherstone. ‚ÄúI‚Äôll tell you. In the dock‚ÅÝ‚Äîat Wilchester Assizes. Eh?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cotherstone made no answer. He had put the tips of his fingers together, and now he was tapping the nails of one hand against the nails of the other. And he stared and stared at the face so close to his own‚ÅÝ‚Äîas if it had been the face of a man resurrected from the grave. Within him there was a feeling of extraordinary physical sickness; it was quickly followed by one of inertia, just as extraordinary. He felt as if he had been mesmerized; as if he could neither move nor speak. And Kitely sat there, a hand on his victim‚Äôs arm, his face sinister and purposeful, close to his.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFact!‚Äù he murmured. ‚ÄúAbsolute fact! I remember everything. It‚Äôs come on me bit by bit, though. I thought I knew you when I first came here‚ÅÝ‚Äîthen I had a feeling that I knew Mallalieu. And‚ÅÝ‚Äîin time‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI remembered‚ÅÝ‚Äîeverything! Of course, when I saw you both‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhere I did see you‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou weren‚Äôt Mallalieu¬Ý&amp; Cotherstone. You were‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cotherstone suddenly made an effort, and shook off the thin fingers which lay on his sleeve. His pale face grew crimson, and the veins swelled on his forehead.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúConfound you!‚Äù he said in a low, concentrated voice. ‚ÄúWho are you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Kitely shook his head and smiled quietly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo need to grow warm,‚Äù he answered. ‚ÄúOf course, it‚Äôs excusable in you. Who am I? Well, if you really want to know, I‚Äôve been employed in the police line for thirty-five years‚ÅÝ‚Äîuntil lately.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA detective!‚Äù exclaimed Cotherstone.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot when I was present at Wilchester‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat time,‚Äù replied Kitely. ‚ÄúBut afterwards‚ÅÝ‚Äîin due course. Ah!‚ÅÝ‚Äîdo you know, I often was curious as to what became of you both! But I never dreamed of meeting you‚ÅÝ‚Äîhere. Of course, you came up North after you‚Äôd done your time? Changed your names, started a new life‚ÅÝ‚Äîand here you are! Clever!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cotherstone was recovering his wits. He had got out of his chair by that time, and had taken up a position on the hearthrug, his back to the fire, his hands in his pockets, his eyes on his visitor. He was thinking‚ÅÝ‚Äîand for the moment he let Kitely talk.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes‚ÅÝ‚Äîclever!‚Äù continued Kitely in the same level, subdued tones, ‚Äúvery clever indeed! I suppose you‚Äôd carefully planted some of that money you‚ÅÝ‚Äîgot hold of? Must have done, of course‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôd want money to start this business. Well, you‚Äôve done all this on the straight, anyhow. And you‚Äôve done well, too. Odd, isn‚Äôt it, that I should come to live down here, right away in the far North of England, and find you in such good circumstances, too! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝMallalieu, Mayor of Highmarket‚ÅÝ‚Äîhis second term of office! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCotherstone, Borough Treasurer of Highmarket‚ÅÝ‚Äînow in his sixth year of that important post! I say again‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôve both done uncommonly well‚ÅÝ‚Äîuncommonly!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHave you got any more to say?‚Äù asked Cotherstone.</p>
			<p>But Kitely evidently intended to say what he had to say in his own fashion. He took no notice of Cotherstone‚Äôs question, and presently, as if he were amusing himself with reminiscences of a long dead past, he spoke again, quietly and slowly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes,‚Äù he murmured, ‚Äúuncommonly well! And of course you‚Äôd have capital. Put safely away, of course, while you were doing your time. Let‚Äôs see‚ÅÝ‚Äîit was a Building Society that you defrauded, wasn‚Äôt it? Mallalieu was treasurer, and you were secretary. Yes‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI remember now. The amount was two thous‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cotherstone made a sudden exclamation and a sharp movement‚ÅÝ‚Äîboth checked by an equally sudden change of attitude and expression on the part of the ex-detective. For Kitely sat straight up and looked the junior partner squarely in the face.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBetter not, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCotherstone!‚Äù he said, with a grin that showed his yellow teeth. ‚ÄúYou can‚Äôt very well choke the life out of me in your own office, can you? You couldn‚Äôt hide my old carcase as easily as you and Mallalieu hid those Building Society funds, you know. So‚ÅÝ‚Äîbe calm! I‚Äôm a reasonable man‚ÅÝ‚Äîand getting an old man.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He accompanied the last words with a meaning smile, and Cotherstone took a turn or two about the room, trying to steady himself. And Kitely presently went on again, in the same monotonous tones:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThink it all out‚ÅÝ‚Äîby all means,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt suppose there‚Äôs a soul in all England but myself knows your secret‚ÅÝ‚Äîand Mallalieu‚Äôs. It was sheer accident, of course, that I ever discovered it. But‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI know! Just consider what I do know. Consider, too, what you stand to lose. There‚Äôs Mallalieu, so much respected that he‚Äôs Mayor of this ancient borough for the second time. There‚Äôs you‚ÅÝ‚Äîso much trusted that you‚Äôve been Borough Treasurer for years. You can‚Äôt afford to let me tell the Highmarket folk that you two are ex-convicts! Besides, in your case there‚Äôs another thing‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere‚Äôs your daughter.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Cotherstone groaned‚ÅÝ‚Äîa deep, unmistakable groan of sheer torture. But Kitely went on remorselessly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYour daughter‚Äôs just about to marry the most promising young man in the place,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúA young fellow with a career before him. Do you think he‚Äôd marry her if he knew that her father‚ÅÝ‚Äîeven if it is thirty years ago‚ÅÝ‚Äîhad been convicted of‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLook you here!‚Äù interrupted Cotherstone, through set teeth. ‚ÄúI‚Äôve had enough! I‚Äôve asked you once before if you‚Äôd any more to say‚ÅÝ‚Äînow I‚Äôll put it in another fashion. For I see what you‚Äôre after‚ÅÝ‚Äîand it‚Äôs blackmail! How much do you want? Come on‚ÅÝ‚Äîgive it a name!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúName nothing, till you‚Äôve told Mallalieu,‚Äù answered Kitely. ‚ÄúThere‚Äôs no hurry. You two can‚Äôt, and I shan‚Äôt, run away. Time enough‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôve the whip hand. Tell your partner, the Mayor, all I‚Äôve told you‚ÅÝ‚Äîthen you can put your heads together, and see what you‚Äôre inclined to do. An annuity, now?‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat would suit me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou haven‚Äôt mentioned this to a soul?‚Äù asked Cotherstone anxiously.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBah!‚Äù sneered Kitely. ‚ÄúD‚Äôye think I‚Äôm a fool? Not likely. Well‚ÅÝ‚Äînow you know. I‚Äôll come in here again tomorrow afternoon. And‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôll both be here, and ready with a proposal.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He picked up his glass, leisurely drank off its remaining contents, and without a word of farewell opened the door and went quietly away.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
