<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV: The Pine Wood</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Pine Wood</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Brereton, standing back in the room, the cigar which Cotherstone had just given him unlighted in one hand, the glass which Lettie had presented to him in the other, was keenly watching the man who had just spoken and the man to whom he spoke. But all his attention was quickly concentrated on Cotherstone. For despite a strong effort to control himself, Cotherstone swayed a little, and instinctively put out a hand and clutched Bent‚Äôs arm. He paled, too‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe sudden spasm of pallor was almost instantly succeeded by a quick flush of colour. He made another effort‚ÅÝ‚Äîand tried to laugh.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNonsense, man!‚Äù he said thickly and hoarsely. ‚ÄúMurder? Who should want to kill an old chap like that? It‚Äôs‚ÅÝ‚Äîhere, give me a drink, one of you‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs‚ÅÝ‚Äîa bit startling!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bent seized a tumbler which he himself had just mixed, and Cotherstone gulped off half its contents. He looked round apologetically.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI think I‚Äôm not as strong as I was,‚Äù he muttered. ‚ÄúOverwork, likely‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôve been a bit shaky of late. A shock like that‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm sorry,‚Äù said Garthwaite, who looked surprised at the effect of his news. ‚ÄúI ought to have known better. But you see, yours is the nearest house‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúQuite right, my lad, quite right,‚Äù exclaimed Cotherstone. ‚ÄúYou did the right thing. Here!‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe‚Äôd better go up. Have you called the police?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI sent the man from the cottage at the foot of your garden,‚Äù answered Garthwaite. ‚ÄúHe was just locking up as I passed, so I told him, and sent him off.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôll go,‚Äù said Cotherstone. He looked round at his guests. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôll come?‚Äù he asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt you go, father,‚Äù urged Lettie, ‚Äúif you‚Äôre not feeling well.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm all right,‚Äù insisted Cotherstone. ‚ÄúA mere bit of weakness‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs all. Now that I know what‚Äôs to be faced‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù he twisted suddenly on Garthwaite‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúwhat makes you think it‚Äôs murder?‚Äù he demanded. ‚ÄúMurder! That‚Äôs a big word.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Garthwaite glanced at Lettie, who was whispering to Bent, and shook his head.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTell you when we get outside,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt want to frighten your daughter.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCome on, then,‚Äù said Cotherstone. He hurried into the hall and snatched up an overcoat. ‚ÄúFetch me that lantern out of the kitchen,‚Äù he called to the parlourmaid. ‚ÄúLight it! Don‚Äôt you be afraid, Lettie,‚Äù he went on, turning to his daughter. ‚ÄúThere‚Äôs naught to be afraid of‚ÅÝ‚Äînow. You gentlemen coming with us?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bent and Brereton had already got into their coats: when the maid came with the lantern, all four men went out. And as soon as they were in the garden Cotherstone turned on Garthwaite.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow do you know he‚Äôs murdered?‚Äù he asked. ‚ÄúHow could you tell?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll tell you all about it, now we‚Äôre outside,‚Äù answered Garthwaite. ‚ÄúI‚Äôd been over to Spennigarth, to see Hollings. I came back over the Shawl, and made a shortcut through the wood. And I struck my foot against something‚ÅÝ‚Äîsomething soft, you know‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI don‚Äôt like thinking of that! And so I struck a match, and looked, and saw this old fellow‚ÅÝ‚Äîdon‚Äôt like thinking of that, either. He was laid there, a few yards out of the path that runs across the Shawl at that point. I saw he was dead‚ÅÝ‚Äîand as for his being murdered, well, all I can say is, he‚Äôs been strangled! That‚Äôs flat.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúStrangled!‚Äù exclaimed Bent.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAye, without doubt,‚Äù replied Garthwaite. ‚ÄúThere‚Äôs a bit of rope round his neck that tight that I couldn‚Äôt put my little finger between it and him! But you‚Äôll see for yourselves‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs not far up the Shawl. You never heard anything, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCotherstone?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo, we heard naught,‚Äù answered Cotherstone. ‚ÄúIf it‚Äôs as you say, there‚Äôd be naught to hear.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He had led them out of his grounds by a side-gate, and they were now in the thick of the firs and pines which grew along the steep, somewhat rugged slope of the Shawl. He put the lantern into Garthwaite‚Äôs hand.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHere‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou show the way,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know where it is, of course.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou were going straight to it,‚Äù remarked Garthwaite. He turned to Brereton, who was walking at his side. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôre a lawyer, aren‚Äôt you?‚Äù he asked. ‚ÄúI heard that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBent had a lawyer friend stopping with him just now‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe hear all the bits of news in a little place like Highmarket. Well‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôll understand, likely‚ÅÝ‚Äîit hadn‚Äôt been long done!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou noticed that?‚Äù said Brereton.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI touched him,‚Äù replied Garthwaite. ‚ÄúHis hand and cheek were‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust warm. He couldn‚Äôt have been dead so very long‚ÅÝ‚Äîas I judged matters. And‚ÅÝ‚Äîhere he is!‚Äù</p>
			<p>He twisted sharply round the corner of one of the great masses of limestone which cropped out amongst the trees, and turned the light of the lantern on the dead man.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere!‚Äù he said in a hushed voice. ‚ÄúThere!‚Äù</p>
			<p>The four men came to a halt, each gazing steadily at the sight they had come to see. It needed no more than a glance to assure each that he was looking on death: there was that in Kitely‚Äôs attitude which forbade any other possibility.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe‚Äôs just as I found him,‚Äù whispered Garthwaite. ‚ÄúI came round this rock from there, d‚Äôye see, and my foot knocked against his shoulder. But, you know, he‚Äôs been dragged here! Look at that!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Brereton, after a glance at the body, had looked round at its surroundings. The wood thereabouts was carpeted‚ÅÝ‚Äîthickly carpeted‚ÅÝ‚Äîwith pine needles; they lay several inches thick beneath the trunks of the trees; they stretched right up to the edge of the rock. And now, as Garthwaite turned the lantern, they saw that on this soft carpet there was a great slur‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe murderer had evidently dragged his victim some yards across the pine needles before depositing him behind the rock. And at the end of this mark there were plain traces of a struggle‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe soft, easily yielding stuff was disturbed, kicked about, upheaved, but as Brereton at once recognized, it was impossible to trace footprints in it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs where it must have been,‚Äù said Garthwaite. ‚ÄúYou see there‚Äôs a bit of a path there. The old man must have been walking along that path, and whoever did it must have sprung out on him there‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhere all those marks are‚ÅÝ‚Äîand when he‚Äôd strangled him dragged him here. That‚Äôs how I figure it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝCotherstone.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Lights were coming up through the wood beneath them, glancing from point to point amongst the trees. Then followed a murmur of voices, and three or four men came into view‚ÅÝ‚Äîpolicemen, carrying their lamps, the man whom Garthwaite had sent into the town, and a medical man who acted as police surgeon.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHere!‚Äù said Bent, as the newcomers advanced and halted irresolutely. ‚ÄúThis way, doctor‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere‚Äôs work for you here‚ÅÝ‚Äîof a sort, anyway. Of course, he‚Äôs dead?‚Äù</p>
			<p>The doctor had gone forward as soon as he caught sight of the body, and he dropped on his knees at its side while the others gathered round. In the added light everybody now saw things more clearly. Kitely lay in a heap‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust as a man would lie who had been unceremoniously thrown down. But Brereton‚Äôs sharp eyes saw at once that after he had been flung at the foot of the mass of rock some hand had disarranged his clothing. His overcoat and under coat had been torn open, hastily, if not with absolute violence; the lining of one trousers pocket was pulled out; there were evidences that his waistcoat had been unbuttoned and its inside searched: everything seemed to indicate that the murderer had also been a robber.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe‚Äôs not been dead very long,‚Äù said the doctor, looking up. ‚ÄúCertainly not more than three-quarters of an hour. Strangled? Yes!‚ÅÝ‚Äîand by somebody who has more than ordinary knowledge of how quickly a man may be killed in that way! Look how this cord is tied‚ÅÝ‚Äîno amateur did that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>He turned back the neckcloth from the dead man‚Äôs throat, and showed the others how the cord had been slipped round the neck in a running-knot and fastened tightly with a cunning twist.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhoever did this had done the same thing before‚ÅÝ‚Äîprobably more than once,‚Äù he continued. ‚ÄúNo man with that cord round his neck, tightly knotted like that, would have a chance‚ÅÝ‚Äîhowever free his hands might be. He‚Äôd be dead before he could struggle. Does no one know anything about this? No more than that?‚Äù he went on, when he had heard what Garthwaite could tell. ‚ÄúWell, this is murder, anyway! Are there no signs of anything about here?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt you think his clothing looks as if he had been robbed?‚Äù said Brereton, pointing to the obvious signs. ‚ÄúThat should be noted before he‚Äôs moved.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve noted that, sir,‚Äù said the police-sergeant, who had bent over the body while the doctor was examining it. ‚ÄúThere‚Äôs one of his pockets turned inside out, and all his clothing‚Äôs been torn open. Robbery, of course‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs what it‚Äôs been‚ÅÝ‚Äîmurder for the sake of robbery!‚Äù</p>
			<p>One of the policemen, having satisfied his curiosity stepped back and began to search the surroundings with the aid of his lamp. He suddenly uttered a sharp exclamation.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHere‚Äôs something!‚Äù he said, stooping to the foot of a pine-tree and picking up a dark object. ‚ÄúAn old pocketbook‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing in it, though.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat was his,‚Äù remarked Cotherstone. ‚ÄúI‚Äôve seen it before. He used to carry it in an inner pocket. Empty, do you say?‚ÅÝ‚Äîno papers?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot a scrap of anything,‚Äù answered the policeman, handing the book over to his sergeant, and proceeding to search further. ‚ÄúWe‚Äôd best to see if there‚Äôs any footprints about.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôd better examine that path, then,‚Äù said Garthwaite. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôll find no prints on all this pine-needle stuff‚ÅÝ‚Äînaught to go by, anyway‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs too thick and soft. But he must have come along that path, one way or another‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôve met him walking in here of an evening, more than once.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The doctor, who had exchanged a word or two with the sergeant, turned to Cotherstone.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWasn‚Äôt he a tenant of yours?‚Äù he asked. ‚ÄúHad the cottage at the top of the Shawl here. Well, we‚Äôd better have the body removed there, and someone should go up and warn his family.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs no family,‚Äù answered Cotherstone. ‚ÄúHe‚Äôd naught but a housekeeper‚ÅÝ‚ÄîMiss Pett. She‚Äôs an elderly woman‚ÅÝ‚Äîand not likely to be startled, from what I‚Äôve seen of her.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll go,‚Äù said Bent. ‚ÄúI know the housekeeper.‚Äù He touched Brereton‚Äôs elbow, and led him away amongst the trees and up the wood. ‚ÄúThis is a strange affair!‚Äù he continued when they were clear of the others. ‚ÄúDid you hear what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRockcliffe said?‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat whoever had done it was familiar with that sort of thing!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI saw for myself,‚Äù replied Brereton. ‚ÄúI noticed that cord, and the knot on it, at once. A man whose neck was tied up like that could be thrown down, thrown anywhere, left to stand up, if you like, and he‚Äôd be literally helpless, even if, as the doctor said, he had the use of his hands. He‚Äôd be unconscious almost at once‚ÅÝ‚Äîdead very soon afterwards. Murder?‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI should think so!‚ÅÝ‚Äîand a particularly brutal and determined one. Bent!‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhoever killed that poor old fellow was a man of great strength and of‚ÅÝ‚Äîknowledge! Knowledge, mind you!‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe knew the trick. You haven‚Äôt any doubtful character in Highmarket who has ever lived in India, have you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIndia! Why India?‚Äù asked Bent.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBecause I should say that the man who did that job has learned some of the Indian tricks with cords and knots,‚Äù answered Brereton. ‚ÄúThat murder‚Äôs suggestive of Thuggeeism in some respects. That the cottage?‚Äù he went on, pointing to a dim light ahead of him. ‚ÄúThis housekeeper, now?‚ÅÝ‚Äîis she the sort who‚Äôll take it quietly?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôs as queer a character as the old fellow himself was,‚Äù replied Bent, as they cleared the wood and entered a hedge-enclosed garden at the end of which stood an old-fashioned cottage. ‚ÄúI‚Äôve talked to her now and then when calling here‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI should say she‚Äôs a woman of nerve.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Brereton looked narrowly at Miss Pett when she opened the door. She carried a tallow candle in one hand and held it high above her head to throw a light on the callers; its dim rays fell more on herself than on them. A tall, gaunt, elderly woman, almost fleshless of face, and with a skin the colour of old parchment, out of which shone a pair of bright black eyes; the oddity of her appearance was heightened by her headdress‚ÅÝ‚Äîa glaring red and yellow handkerchief tightly folded in such a fashion as to cover any vestige of hair. Her arms, bare to the elbow, and her hands were as gaunt as her face, but Brereton was quick to recognize the suggestion of physical strength in the muscles and sinews under the parchment-like skin. A strange, odd-looking woman altogether, he thought, and not improved by the fact that she appeared to have lost all her teeth, and that a long, sharp nose and prominent chin almost met before her sunken lips.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, it‚Äôs you, is it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBent?‚Äù she said, before either of the young men could speak. ‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝKitely‚Äôs gone out for his regular bedtime constitution‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe will have that, wet or fine, every night. But he‚Äôs much longer than usual, and‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>She stopped suddenly, seeing some news in Bent‚Äôs face, and her own contracted to a questioning look.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs there aught amiss?‚Äù she asked. ‚ÄúHas something happened him? Aught that‚Äôs serious? You needn‚Äôt be afraid to speak, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝBent‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere‚Äôs naught can upset or frighten me, let me tell you‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôm past all that!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm afraid <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝKitely‚Äôs past everything, too, then,‚Äù said Bent. He looked steadily at her for a moment, and seeing that she understood, went on. ‚ÄúThey‚Äôre bringing him up, Miss Pett‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou‚Äôd better make ready. You won‚Äôt be alarmed‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI don‚Äôt think there‚Äôs any doubt that he‚Äôs been murdered.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The woman gazed silently at her visitors; then, nodding her turbaned head, she drew back into the cottage.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs what I expected,‚Äù she muttered. ‚ÄúI warned him‚ÅÝ‚Äîmore than once. Well‚ÅÝ‚Äîlet them bring him, then.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She vanished into a side-room, and Bent and Brereton went down the garden and met the others, carrying the dead man. Cotherstone followed behind the police, and as he approached Bent he pulled him by the sleeve and drew him aside.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs a clue!‚Äù he whispered. ‚ÄúA clue, d‚Äôye hear‚ÅÝ‚Äîa strong clue!‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
